Your blueprint, positioning, and category recommendations should absolutely use Amazon categories — but they should not be determined only by whatever random Amazon categories appear in the initial noisy search.

What I meant is:

The niche object should anchor what we expect the Amazon categories to be, and the Amazon data should confirm, refine, or course-correct that — not override the niche prematurely.

So the flow becomes:

✅ What You Do Want
1. Use Amazon categories as the primary basis for:

Final recommended categories

Competitive landscape analysis

Pricing expectations

Keyword selection

Blueprint positioning (when the comps are correct)

2. BUT only after verifying that the Amazon categories align with the user’s niche.

This is the part that is currently broken in your system.

Right now, you are:

❌ Taking a noisy search term

→ returning a bunch of unrelated books
→ discovering some strong books in unexpected categories
→ assuming that category = your user’s niche
→ building the blueprint & verdict around that category

This is how you ended up turning a life-direction self-help idea into:

New Age → Mental & Spiritual Healing → Divination / Gene Keys

which is not at all what the author intended.

Amazon categories are powerful — but only when you’re using the right pool of books.

✅ What You Actually Want (Correct Pipeline)
Step 1: Derive a structured niche from the user

This is NOT the final category — it’s the anchor.

Example:

{
  "canonicalGenre": "Self-Help",
  "expectedDomains": ["Personal Transformation", "Motivation", "Purpose"],
  "worldview": "secular or mixed",
  "audience": "general adults"
}


This keeps you from drifting into unrelated genres (New Age, Fiction, Romance, etc.).

Step 2: Generate good Amazon search terms FROM the niche

Not from the literal user sentence.

This yields cleaner comps in cleaner categories.

Step 3: Run multiple Amazon searches

And score them for:

% core_books

relevance

category purity

alignment with the NICHE expectations

This gives you an objective way to select the right search term.

Step 4: Only once you’ve identified a “high-purity” comp pool

THEN you:

⭐ Build the blueprint
⭐ Assign final Amazon categories
⭐ Offer keyword recommendations
⭐ Deliver a verdict (GREEN/YELLOW/RED)

At this stage Amazon categories absolutely DO drive the blueprint and positioning.

But the niche object protects you from misinterpretation.
It ensures that:

You don’t get pulled into Divination because of The Gene Keys

You don’t build a blueprint for New Age when the user wants SELF-HELP

You don’t issue a GREEN verdict off 3 core books in the wrong category

You don’t position the book incorrectly

🔥 KEY IDEA (Write this into your system docs)

Amazon categories determine your final genre, BUT ONLY after the system is confident that they represent the correct niche.
The niche object is the anchor that prevents category drift.

This gives you both:

✔ The power of Amazon’s real-world data
✔ The correctness and stability of a semantic niche model
🚧 What Your System Does Now (The Bug)

Right now:

Extract niche → turn it into a long, unnatural search term

Amazon returns random books

Category inference sees New Age / Divination in the comps

System says: “Ah! Your niche is Mental & Spiritual Healing!”

Blueprint & verdict follow that category

This is category drift.

You’re letting Amazon’s messiness overpower the niche — instead of using the niche as a filter to select good Amazon search terms.

🧱 What You Need to Implement Next (Minimal Fix)

Build structured niche object

Generate 3–8 search terms from the niche

Score each search term

Pick the search with the cleanest category alignment

ONLY THEN infer Amazon categories

ONLY THEN build blueprint + category recommendations

Once you do this, everything else in your tool becomes dramatically more stable and accurate.